But what I'm trying to do is put together a little
history of the executive secretary's position
with the Texas Medical Association. I'll have to
ramble a little bit. In fact, I'll have to go back
and refer to some of my notes on dates. But for
specific dates, times, and places, we'll have to
refer to the Texas Federal Bulletin, which is on
file in the Austin office.
We will start with the year 1943. Many, many things
happened during that particular year. And if you
may recall, it was the tail end of the war period.
Dr. T.O. Booth was state veterinarian in the early
part of 42,
and volunteered to go back into the service. Dr.
M.B. Stearns of Dallas was the original editor of
the Texas Veterinary Bulletin and had issued some
two or three
issues prior to his return to military service.
And I think if we check the bulletin records, we'll
find that Dr. Booth probably published at least
one or two. But I became a state veterinarian upon
the volunteering of Dr. T.O. Booth. I was
assistant state veterinarian at the time,
stationed in New Brunswick, Texas. When a group of
my colleagues got together in Austin and decided
that I should move on up as state veterinarian, It
was a rather embarrassing situation because,
first off, they had agreed to assess
veterinarians in Texas to supplement the
paycheck for state veterinarians. Believe it or
not, in 1943, the state veterinarian's salary was
$2,750 a year, plus expenses.
decided to go to Fort Worth, become the state
veterinarian, but the course could not accept any
contributions from my colleagues. As it turned
out, I inherited the Texas Veterinarian
Billetton and also the secretaryship of the State
Veterinary Medical Association, or the Texas
Veterinary Medical Association.
We were able to maneuver and manage I officed in the
W.T. Wagner building downtown Fort Worth and
there was a small office on the same floor
available and I rented that office and placed the
secretary and the bulletin office in that room the
idea being that I did not want to be in a position of
conflict of interest, and by separating the
offices, we at least could show our desire to
remain a separate entity. Again, during that
year, I also inherited a position on the World
Manpower Commission which had to do with the
drafting of veterinarians or also drafting of all
professional people such as physicians, nurses,
dentists, and the like. Mine was representing the
veterinary profession. So 1943 was a bang-up
start
for the first time probably in the history. was a
separate and complete office for the Executive
Secretary of the Texas Veteran Association. I
mentioned the War Mountain Fire Commission, the
Bulletin, and so forth, all supplemented towards
this office. And the expenses alone were all that
were taken by me as secretary at the time and this
was a brand new step because the first time any
funds had been provided to a secretary per se the
title of executive secretary just kind of grew out
of the position we managed to get some furniture
from the wall mine power commission which was a
government agency desk chairs the like cabinet
filing cabinets I began to step out, and then, of
course, the first major step was to gather funds to
continue the publication of the Texas
Veterinarian Bill. This put us into the
advertising game, and, of course, we catered to
advertisers with sales only to veterinarians. We
were rather selfish and aristocratic in our
procedures because we set a fee for the
advertising that was necessary to cover the cost
of the publication. And many of the companies we
dealt with had advertising agencies who had
always expected a commission. We had a flat rate
and told them so. Of course, they felt like they
were obligated, in a sense, to advertise with us,
so we got along beautifully in that route. The
reason I rival so much here is that for the ten years
that I served as the Executive Secretary, 95
percent of its success could be based upon the fact
that it was a veterinarian representing
veterinarians. and the various positions that I
held during that interim complemented or
assisted in our development. In so many words, we
could not have grown as rapidly as I think we did had
it not been for the fact that as state veterinarian
I was able to work it right along hand in hand in my
visitations out over the state and the like,
created the atmosphere of consultation, etc. The
year 1943 was a definite growing up period of the
Texas Veterinary Medical Association. I mention
this because it was also a growing up period of the
acceptance of the veterinary profession, the
pressures that were placed upon them during the
war period, The fact that unless they were
essentially classified within their area or
territory, they were vulnerable to the draft. All
in all, it was a tremendous transition.
I'll have to, of course, compare the various
positions that I held during that time as having
direct influence and vice versa on each other. The
state veterinarian's office was largely managed
and handled by a layperson who was called a
director. And there was a constant maneuver that
took place between he and I during that period,
resulting finally in the reestablishment of the
state veterinarian as the director and the
administrative office of the Livestock Sanitary
Commission of Texas. It was an uphill battle
because, again, we were feeling our way by
interrelationship between the veterinary
profession and the enforcement agencies, as was
the state veterinary. The enforcement, of
course, necessitated a closer relationship
because, in many instances, there was a pot called
the kettle black, and the veterinarian in the
field was actually responsible for carrying out
the majority of the enforcement regulations of
that department. Thus, a constant source of
information could be sent out by way of the Texas
Veteran Air Bulletin with the interlocking of the
duties of the two offices. I know this is rambling
and it's hard to explain,
We did begin to understand the requirements
necessary for veterinarians to make interstate
shipments and handle livestock disease
outbreaks and on and on and on. We felt kind of
lonesome during that period insofar as
communications between veterinarians back to
their alma mater at A&M uh all of these uh it looked
like the veterinarian was the last one to receive
any information and the rest of it went out to the
agricultural channels to the county agents and so
this led on then eventually to the movement of the
office finally to a m at which time in 1945 I
accepted the position of Extension Veteran,
again taking the office of the State Association
with me, with the full sanction of my bosses and the
like, and we established another office, what was
called the North Gate of Texas A&M. It was an
upstairs office, again keeping our
relationships separated as much as possible.
When we got into the extension veterinary side of
it, it was with the full understanding of the
bosses that we were going into an educational
period. The prime purpose of my employment was to
cement relationships between the various
agricultural representatives, such as county
agents, and the local veterinarian. Kind of a
goodwill emissary, and at the same time offered
the golden opportunity to visit with all of the
veterinarians in Texas. In fact, Dr. Marsteller,
my previous dean of the veterinary school, was
very envious of the fact that I couldn't go out all
over Texas. Also, it was true of the faculty of the
veterinary college. I was free to travel the state
of Texas, preach the gospel, but I tried
desperately to come back and at least report to the
dean of the veterinary school of what was
happening out there. The Texas Gun Air Bill
continued. Each time, as in Fort Worth and also at
A&M, it was printed and handled by local printing
companies and was absolutely free of any other
connection. The
period of 43 to 45 I mentioned was a growing up
period. We took veterinarians from cowboy boots
to tuxedos. We had many meetings, you know, as it
was established, one in the summer at A&M and one in
the fall elsewhere through the state. These were
largely fraternal-type meetings. We did have
good programs. But the camaraderie and so forth
began to build a profession to recognize each
other's talents and abilities and began to work
together. The most outstanding meeting, I guess,
during that particular period I don't remember
the exact date without checking, but it was a
combination meeting of the Southern Veterinary
Medical Association held in Dallas, Texas, when
Dr. R.A. Self of Dallas was the local chairman, and
we had a rather large gathering of veterinarians
from Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, et
cetera. So much for that, Rodman, and the period
of A&M episode. She made the relationships a great
deal between the veterinary school and the
veterinary profession because we were on the same
ground and territories. And it had grown and
developed so much that By that time, they were
paying a fixed salary and offering secretarial
assistance to the executive secretary.
This is where the program began to grow. In 1948, I
accepted a position of pharmaceutical
representative for one of the solid veterinary
supply houses United States and it was done I know
because of my contact throughout the state and
they bought that rather than any particular
ability again I was free to wander the state of
Texas under the guise of service representing the
veterinary supply house but always been able to
carry on the duties and responsibilities of the
executive secretary and build the bulletin into a
much better publication and also carry the gospel
to the veterinarians of texas about that time of
course in between there we lost the dean of the
veterinary school started searching for new ones
wound up with dr rc dunn as acting dean and we began
to try hard to put together the extension
veterinary directly into the veterinary school
this was a hopefully an act that would be accepted
at that time but it wasn't and of course that again,
disturbed me enough to move on to the next step.
From the latter part of 1949,
I got the desire to come back home and get back into
general practice. Having done all of these other
things over a period of many years, I was beginning
to feel like it was time to settle down. So I came
back to New Braunfels at the request of a
cooperative group and organized a co-op cremary.
I built it from scratch and managed it through to
1951. And during the time of the co-op cremary, I
established my own veterinary hospital. Dan was
able to put my office or the executive secretary's
office all into one unit. I had a full-time
secretary to assist and an awful good local
printing publisher that assisted us in
maintaining and keeping the bulletin going. And
the only difficulty arose, of course, was still
some callbacks on other relationships we'd had
over a period of time. In other words, it wound up or
accumulated or cumulated or whatever the word I
want to use. In 1953, thereabouts,
they had a landfrax outbreak in Wichita Falls. At
the request of a colleague in Wichita, I was called
up to assist in negotiating some kind of a
diplomatic maneuver. The Red Hands were all
feeling a sudden burst of popularity, and each one
feeling like he was a hotshot for the area. The
livestock side of the commission was balking. The
local cattle raisers were squawking, and so I
reluctantly went up, visited with the
practitioners for breakfast, settled on one
representative, made our pitch to the cattlemen,
and then was turned down by the livestock signer
commission, and I began to realize that In my
position, I was no longer speaking for the
profession. It was kind of a lonesome affair and
felt like it was time to move on. So in 1953, I
resigned as executive secretary and was awarded a
lifetime membership in the Texas Dynamical
Association.
So far, this sounds like purely a personal
history. And therefore, this segment, we will
attempt to cover some of the accomplishments that
we feel like took place during those 10 years in the
veterinary profession itself. First off, we'll
go back and repeat that the association to the
various offices held and the fact that I was a
veterinarian I think helped tremendously in that
period of ten years. We were talking to each other,
we were understanding each other, and the
association began to grow. The early years were
largely expenses were taken care of by a
registration fee at the conventions these were
nominal and largely paid just for the convention
there was no surplus funds developed at that time
as we began to grow of course developed the
commercial aspect of displays and began to make a
little bit of money off the convention to assist in
the growth of the office. Some of the major
highlights, I think, probably took place in the
changeover in the state veterinarian's office,
put the veterinarian back into his position of
responsibility. This was all done by full
knowledge of the profession itself, of what was
taking place and what was going on. Also, we began
to diligently
participate in disease outbreaks of all types
with tremendous cooperation from A&M Experiment
Station. We began to get first-hand information
on what was going on and were able to transmit it
back to the veterinary profession rally the
troops, as the words are, and begin to
intelligently approach such things as rabies
outbreaks and the like. Many, many experiences
directly with local veterinary associations
were necessary during that particular time.
This, of course, expanded greatly during the
extension period at A&M because of the
relationship ability to take a faculty member or a
experiment station member directly with you in
contact with the general public and the
veterinary detectives. I also recall that the
sessions of the Veterinary Association were held
in the summer and the fall. In the fall elsewhere
over the state, in the summer always at A&M. We've
managed to encourage A&M to understand that we
were a profession such as anything that came out of
the college, from engineer or whatnot. And we felt
like they owed an obligation to the profession
just like they did to those others. And they were
holding various type summer seminars for other
groups, and so during that period they did agree
and took over the summer session as a
college-sponsored event. The conventions that
were held, like I mentioned before, were largely
fraternal type. Everybody had a good time, lots of
entertaining and visitations and bill sessions.
But began to develop a strong program covering the
general practice of MMS. The specialization
began to appear and the use of radiological
equipment and on and on and on. All of those
developments were In other
words, the veterinary executive secretary was
closely related to that development program and
consequently kept it within the realm of what they
felt was actually the needs of the profession at
the time.
I guess the big highlight was the fact that we
changed from enforcement aspects or studies to
educational. And in the educational realm, we
just had a case recently to recall that 40-some odd
years ago we organized the first group of
interested cattlemen in brucellosis. We had
representatives of sheep, goat, and raisers, the
swine breeders, the herford breeders, the
shorthorn breeders, the Texas Cattle Raisers
Association, and on and on. And we were able to put
together a session at NM,
which We thought we had full agreement of all of the
representatives of the various breed
organizations, but were flat overruled on
parliamentary procedure by the Texas Cattle
Raiders Association, in which they said that
those people all had to go back to their
organizations, get their approval before they
could vote. on any program for the state of Texas.
Ironically, here it is 40-some-odd years later.
They had a big wrestle in the legislature this last
session. Someday, someday.
The rest of it, I'll have to refer to the Texas
Department of Buildings because it attempted
during that period to pretty much carry the
minutes of the various meetings held by the
organization. The board of directors, the
executive board, all functioned in proper
procedures and orders, and nearly all of the work
was carried out. specifically based upon the
desires of the representatives of the veteran
profession. There were no new innovative
programs that I can think of at the moment that were
revolutionary, but just a steady, progressive
development of the profession itself.
This is another form of reminiscing over a period
of, well, I guess you'd call it veterinary
medicine in general. Dr. Bob Norton's here now and
raised a few questions about Dr. Mark Francis and
Dr. Hubert Schmidt and Dr. Marsteller and some of
those in the heydays. Actually, Dr. Francis was
the first major participant in the organization
of the Texas Veterinarians. He was also licensed
number one in the state of Texas. Dr. Marsteller
was his protege, and so was Dr. Hubert Schmidt.
Hubert came to A&M from Comfort, Texas. As an
agriculture student and befriended Dr. Francis,
Francis encouraged him to go back to Berlin,
Germany, and he did. He got his degree there and
came back and worked the rest of his life bringing
him in. Dr. Marsteller was a friend from Ohio that
Dr. Francis brought down early in the
organization or early beginning of Edmure
School. Dr. Francis came originally in the
agricultural aspects of it did a little work in the
early experiment days and also is responsible for
dr rc dunn who came in and actually built a
laboratory and produced the whole collar vaccine
on the campus i think now it's a veterinary museum
or it was for a while i don't know what the building
is now i think they moved some of that to the new
library the uh Dr. Francis was an old philosopher,
really, as a teacher. He used to act out a number of
things. I never will forget when he was giving us a
description of the upper esophagus and its
relationship with the trachea and so forth. He
described it as an old bill downtown on a Saturday
afternoon buying a red soda water And when he drank
it, you'd see that old atom dropper jump up and
down, and then he'd give a description of how it's
all interconnected and those type
illustrations. He was not truly a teacher in the
sense that he didn't conform with college rules or
regulations. All of our examinations were pick
out five students in the room and have them write
five questions on the boards. We'd answer all the
questions. We were not permitted to leave the room
until the last man finished. And he'd take all the
papers and throw them in a trash can and said, the
college said I had to give you a test, but they
didn't say a word about who was to grade the papers.
He did all of his grading based on attendance in his
classroom and his observation of your procedures
and your attitudes and the like. I had him,
fortunately, for both years of anatomy and, of
course, in the latter two We were only associated
with them on a friendship basis through Dr. Dunn's
sister-in-law, Evelyn Cahill, who was Dr.
Francis and Dr. Marsteller's secretary. So was
Mary Dunn, who was Dr. Dunn's wife, who was also a
secretary in the veterinary school. Dr. Francis'
main family family, I guess, came, of course, with
his sister. dipping of cattle for the Texas Fever
State. But his other was association with an old
gentleman over in the biology department. I can't
think of his name right now, but biology and
botany. And they used to go together every
Saturday down in the Brazos River bottoms on
archaeological
projects.